---
sidebar_position: 1
title: Helm Introduction
description: Learn about Helm and its benefits.
tags: ["Helm", "Kubernetes", "Package Manager"]
keywords: ["Helm", "Kubernetes", "Package Manager"]
slug: "/helm"
---

Helm is package manager and a templating engine for Kubernetes. It allows you to define, install, and upgrade even the most complex Kubernetes applications. It's like apt, yum, or homebrew for Kubernetes. Primary use case is application deployment and environment management. 

## Helm Architecture

The new architecture of Helm 3 is very simple. It has only client-side components. The server-side components like Tiller are removed in Helm 3. Helm 3 is a client-side application that interacts with the Kubernetes API server.

### Using a Helm Chart

To deploy an application using Helm, you need to create a Helm chart. A Helm chart is a collection of files that describe a related set of Kubernetes resources. A single chart might be used to deploy something simple, like a memcached pod, or something complex, like a full web app stack with HTTP servers, databases, caches, and so on.

First we need to add the repository to the helm

```bash
helm repo add bitnami https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
```

- We can update the repository using the following command

```bash
helm repo update
```

- Then we can install the chart using the following command

```bash
helm install postgres bitnami/postgresql
```

we can search for the available charts using the following command

```bash
helm search repo bitnami
```

Or search the available versions of the chart using the following command

```bash
helm search repo bitnami/postgresql --versions
```

We can also pull the chart locally to look at the configuration files. `--version` flag is used to specify the version of the chart not the app version

```bash
helm pull bitnami/postgresql --version 16.3.0
```

We can give values to the chart using the values flag and padding the values in the yaml file

```bash
helm install postgresql bitnami/postgresql --values values.yaml
```

The values.yaml file should look like this

```yaml
commonAnnotations:
    foo: bar
```

We can upgrade the chart using the following command

```bash
helm upgrade --install postgresql bitnami/postgresql --values values.yaml --version=16.4.0 --namespace=my-namespace
```

We can rollback the chart using the following command `postgresql` is the release name we can get the release name using `helm list`.

```bash
helm rollback postgresql
```

To check helm release status

```bash
helm list
```

To check values provided by the user. Again `postgresql` is the release name

```bash
helm get values postgresql
```

We can also get actual manifest files that are generated by the helm chart. Again `postgresql` is the release name

```bash
helm get manifest postgresql
```

We can uninstall the chart using the following command. Again `postgresql` is the release name

```bash
helm uninstall postgresql
```

### Creating our own Helm Chart

- We can create our own helm chart using the following command. It will generate a dir with all the boilerplate code.

```bash
helm create mychart
```

- We can install the chart using the following command. `mychart` is the chart name and `./mychart` is the path to the chart

```bash
helm install mychart ./mychart
```

We can also apply with a values file

```bash
helm install mychart ./mychart --values values.yaml
```

## Helm Hooks

Helm hooks are a way to interact with the lifecycle of a release. They allow you to intervene at certain points in a release's life cycle. Helm supports the following hooks:

- `pre-install` - Runs before any templates are rendered.
- `post-install` - Runs after all templates have been rendered and resources have been created.

### What's next?

[Learning Resources](./learning-resources.md) - Learn more about Helm with these resources.